# **Navigating Content**

Screen reader users often rely on a list of headings to locate information. Most screen readers have easy ways to isolate and scan a list of page headings, an important feature called the *rotor.*

## **Using headings effectively**

_[DOM order matters](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/accessibility/focus/dom-order-matters)_, not only for focus order but for screen reader order. As you experiment with screen readers like VoiceOver, NVDA, JAWS, and ChromeVox, you'll find **the heading list follows the DOM order rather than the visual order**.

Screen readers interact with the accessibility tree, and the accessibility tree is based on the DOM tree, it follows DOM order. This means that **an appropriate heading structure is more important than ever.** In most well-structured pages, the heading levels are nested to indicate parent-child relationships among content blocks.
<br/>
<br/>

## **Other navigation options**

There are other elements they can use to move around a page, including **_links_, *form controls*, and *landmarks*.**

### **1. links**

Readers can use the screen reader's rotor feature (an easy way to isolate and scan a list of page headings) to access a *list of links* on the page.

This feature is useful only if the screen reader can find the links and the link text is meaningful. For example, here are **some common patterns that make links hard to find**.

- Anchor tags without `href` attributes. These link targets cause problems for screen readers.
- Buttons that are implemented with links. These cause the screen reader to interpret the content as a link, and the button functionality is lost. Replace the anchor tag with a real button and style it appropriately.
- Images used as link content. Sometimes necessary, linked images can be unusable to screen readers. Make sure the image has `alt` attribute text.

Poor link text is another problem. Clickable text such as "learn more" or "click here" provides no semantic information about where the link goes. Instead, use descriptive text like "learn more about responsive design" or "see this canvas tutorial" to help screen readers provide meaningful context about links.

### **2. form controls**

The rotor can also retrieve a *[form control list](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/html/html_forms.htm)*. Using this list, readers can search for specific items and go directly to them.

### **3. landmarks**

Readers can use the rotor to see a *[landmarks list](https://www.w3.org/TR/2017/NOTE-wai-aria-practices-1.1-20171214/examples/landmarks/HTML5.html)*. This list helps readers find the main content and a set of navigational landmarks provided by HTML landmark elements.

HTML5 introduced some new elements that help define the semantic structure of the page, including `header`, `footer`, `nav`, `article`, `section`, `main`, and `aside`. These elements specifically provide structural clues in the page without forcing any built-in styling (which you should do with CSS anyway).

Semantic structural elements replace multiple, repetitive `div` blocks, and provide a clearer, more descriptive way to intuitively express page structure for both authors and readers.
